website/docs: docs about initial perms (#14263)
goauthentik/authentik: website/docs/users-sources/access-control/initial_permissions.mdx

---
title: "RBAC Initial permissions"
description: "Set permissions for object creation."
authentik_version: "2025.4.0"
authentik_preview: true
---

Initial Permissions automatically assigns [object-level permissions](./permissions.md#object-permissions) between a newly created object and its creator.

The purpose of initial permissions is to assign a specific user or role a set of pre-selected permissions that are required for the user(s) to accomplish their tasks

An authentik Admin creates an initial permissions object (a set of selected permissions) and then associates with with either an individual user or with a role (in which case everyone in a group with that role will have the same initial permissions).

## Common use cases

Say you have a new team formed to help create new [flows](../../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/flow/index.md) and [stages](../../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/stages/index.md). These team members need to be able to view and manage all of the flow and stage objects that others on the team created. However, they should not be granted rights to do anything else in the Admin interface.

> In the example use case above, the specific objects that the users or role create and manage could be any object; you could have a team who is in charge of creating new users and managing those user objects, but should not be able to create flows or blueprints or brands, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example use case above, the specific objects that the users or role create and manage could be any object; you could have a team that is in charge of creating new users and managing those user objects, but not able to create flows or blueprints or brands, for example.
```

## High-level workflow

The fundamantal steps to implement initial permissions are as follows:

1. Create a role, to which the initial permissions will be assigned.
2. Create a group, and assign the new role to it, and add any members that you want to use the initial permissions set. You can also create new users later, and add them to the group.
3. Create an initial permissions object, and add all needed permissions to it.
4. Optionally, create additional users and add them to the group to which the role is assigned.

Because the new initial permissions object is coupled with the role (and that role is assigned to a group), the initial permissions object is applied automatically to any new objects (users or flows or any object) that the member user creates.

:::info

> Typically, initial permissions are assigned to a user or role which is not a super-users or Admin; in this case the Admin, when implementing the nitial permissions, will need to assign the `Can view Admin interface permission` in order for the user(s) to access the Admin interface. For details see Step 5 below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, initial permissions are assigned to a user or role which is not a super-user or Admin; in this case the Admin, when implementing the initial permissions, will need to assign the `Can view Admin interface permission` in order for the user(s) to access the Admin interface. For details see Step 5 below.
```

:::

## Create and implement initial permissions

To create a new set of initial permissions and apply them to either a single user or a role (and every user with that role), follow these steps.

1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.

> 2. [Create a new role](../roles/manage_roles.md): navigate to **Directory** > **Roles** to and click **Create**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [Create a new role](../roles/manage_roles.md): navigate to **Directory** > **Roles** and click **Create**.
```

3. [Create a new group](../groups/manage_groups.mdx): navigate to **Directory** > **Groups** and click **Create**. After creating the group:

    - [assign the new role to the group](../groups/manage_groups.mdx#assign-a-role-to-a-group)

>     - [add any members](../user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-group) who you want to use the Initial Permissions. You can add already existing users, or [create new users](../user/user_basic_operations.md#create-a-user).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [add any members](../user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-group) that require the initial permissions. You can add already existing users, or [create new users](../user/user_basic_operations.md#create-a-user).
```

> 4. Create an Initial Permissions object: navigate to **Directory** > **Initial Permissions** and click **Create**. Configure the followoing settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Create an Initial Permissions object: navigate to **Directory** > **Initial Permissions** and click **Create**. Configure the following settings:
```

    - **Name**: Provide a descriptive name for the new initial permissions object.

>     - **Role**: Select the role to which you want to apply initial permissions. When a user who is a member of a group with this role assigned creates an object, Initial Permissions will be applied to that object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Role**: Select the role to which you want to apply initial permissions. When a member of a group with this assigned role creates an object, initial permissions will be applied to that object.
```

    - **Mode**: select whether you want to attach the initial permission to a _role_ or to a _single user_.

        - **Role**: select this to allow everyone with that role (i.e. everyone in a group to which this role is assigned) to be able to see each others' objects.

        - **User**: select this to apply the initial permissions _only_ to a user

    - **Permissions**: select all permissions to add to the initial permissions object.

5. To ensure that the user or role (whichever you selected in the **Mode** configuration step above) to whom you assign the initial permissions _also_ has access to the Admin interface, you need to [grant the global permission `Can view admin interface`](./manage_permissions#assign-can-view-admin-interface-permissions).

> 6. Optionally, create new users and add them to the group. Each new user added to the group will automaticlaly have the set of permissions assign in the initial permissions object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Optionally, create new users and add them to the group. Each new user added to the group will automaticlaly have the set of permissions assigned to the initial permissions object.
```

Author: This one is tricky @dewi-tik because I want to be clear that these are permissions bundled _within_ the IP, part of the IP, not object permissions _assigned to_ the IP... I'll work on this one.

---

> title: "RBAC Initial permissions"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Initial permissions"
```

`InitialPermissions` is not only role-based.

description: "Set permissions for object creation."
authentik_version: "2025.4.0"
authentik_preview: true
---

Initial Permissions automatically assigns [object-level permissions](./permissions.md#object-permissions) between a newly created object and its creator.

> The purpose of initial permissions is to assign a specific user (or role) a set of pre-selected permissions that are required for them to accomplish their tasks.

Reviewer 3: The previous line capitalizes IP and this one does not. Can we decide on the wording? I'd choose capitalized

Author: Yeah, good point, and capitalization has been tearing me up lately... we need to define stronger guidelines in the Style Guide.

Author: We already state, and I still agree with, that features and functioanality and components are not capitalized... so for now I'll not capitalize. But we can of course always reconsider. Things get funky looking fast when too many things are capitalized, though.

An authentik Admin creates an initial permissions object (a set of selected permissions) and then associates it with either:
    1. An individual user.
    2. A role - in which case everyone in a group with that role will have the same initial permissions.

## Common use cases

> Say you have a new team formed to help create [flows](../../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/flow/index.md) and [stages](../../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/stages/index.md). These team members need to be able to view and manage all of the flow and stage objects that others on the team have created. However, they should not be granted rights to do anything else in the Admin interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Imagine you have a new team tasked with creating [flows](../../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/flow/index.md) and [stages](../../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/stages/index.md). These team members need the ability to view and manage all the flow and stage objects created by other team members. However, they should not have permissions to perform any other actions within the Admin interface.
```

> In the example use case above, the specific objects that the users or role create and manage could be any object; you could have a team that is in charge of creating new users and managing those user objects, but not able to create flows or blueprints or brands, for example.

Author: I took half of this one, thanks.

## High-level workflow

> The fundamantal steps to implement initial permissions are as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fundamental steps to implement initial permissions are as follows:
```

> 1. Create a role, to which the initial permissions will be assigned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a role. Initial permissions will be assigned whenever a user with this role creates a new object.
```

2. Create a group, and assign the new role to it, and add any members that you want to use the initial permissions set. You can also create new users later, and add them to the group.
3. Create an initial permissions object, and add all needed permissions to it.
4. Optionally, create additional users and add them to the group to which the role is assigned.

> Because the new initial permissions object is coupled with the role (and that role is assigned to a group), the initial permissions object is applied automatically to any new objects (users or flows or any object) that the member user creates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because the new initial permissions object is linked to the role (which is assigned to a group), it is automatically applied to any new objects (such as users, flows, or any other objects) created by the member user.
```

linked to a group vs assigned to a group. as you wish  can we also include []() for relevant doc links for users and flows?

> Because the new initial permissions object is coupled with the role (and that role is assigned to a group), the initial permissions object is applied automatically to any new objects (users or flows or any object) that the member user creates.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps delete this sentence out if my above [suggestion](https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/pull/14263/files#r2066808148) is included, since then it would be duplicated information.

Author: I did include your excellent suggestion, but I think this paragraph is still worth having... this is complex logic stuff so I want to spell it out pedantically. ;-)

:::info

> Typically, initial permissions are assigned to a user or role which is not a super-user or Admin; in this case the Admin, when implementing the initial permissions, will need to assign the `Can view Admin interface permission` in order for the user(s) to access the Admin interface. For details see Step 5 below.

Reviewer 3: is superuser one word or two? I write it as one

Author: I write it hyphenated but we need to be consistent. Un jour.

> Typically, initial permissions are assigned to a user or role which is not a super-user or Admin; in this case the Admin, when implementing the initial permissions, will need to assign the `Can view Admin interface permission` in order for the user(s) to access the Admin interface. For details see Step 5 below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Typically, initial permissions are assigned to a user or role that is not a super-user or Admin. In this scenario, the Admin, when setting up the initial permissions, will need to grant the `Can view Admin interface` permission to allow the user(s) to access the Admin interface. For details, see Step 5 below.
```

Reviewer 3: that vs which

Author: ohhhh good catch on "which" versus "that"!

> Typically, initial permissions are assigned to a user or role which is not a super-user or Admin; in this case the Admin, when implementing the initial permissions, will need to assign the `Can view Admin interface permission` in order for the user(s) to access the Admin interface. For details see Step 5 below.

Reviewer 2: Not sure how to phrase it, but this is not technically true. E.g. users who

- have an object-level `Can view Flow` permission, and
- don't have `Can access admin interface`

can still view that flow through the API.

Author: Ah... but if they do not explicitly use an API (ooutside of our UI) then it is true? @gergosimonyi ?

Author: also this loop seems less-than-bueno

:::

## Create and implement initial permissions

> To create a new set of initial permissions and apply them to either a single user or a role (and every user with that role), follow these steps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create a new set of initial permissions and apply them to either a single user or a role (and every user with that role), follow these steps:
```

> 1. Log in to authentik as an administrator, and open the authentik Admin interface.

Reviewer 3: we use the word Admin (capitalized) elsewhere and administrator (lowercase and full word) here. can we only use one term?

Reviewer 3: e.g line 12 uses Admin, id rename all to lowercase administrator or admin

Author: We should use the term "administrator" every where, except when saying the "Admin interface."

2. [Create a new role](../roles/manage_roles.md): navigate to **Directory** > **Roles** and click **Create**.

3. [Create a new group](../groups/manage_groups.mdx): navigate to **Directory** > **Groups** and click **Create**. After creating the group:

    - [assign the new role to the group](../groups/manage_groups.mdx#assign-a-role-to-a-group)
    - [add any members](../user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-group) that require the initial permissions. You can add already existing users, or [create new users](../user/user_basic_operations.md#create-a-user).

> 4. Create an Initial Permissions object: navigate to **Directory** > **Initial Permissions** and click **Create**. Configure the following settings:

Reviewer 3: still uppercase hmm
